---
title: "Optimizing the computational performance and maintainability of time-domain modellingtextendash-leveraging multiple right-hand-sides"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2016-06-01-Optimizing-the-computational-performance-and-maintainability-of-time-domain-modellingtextendash-leveraging-multiple-right-hand-sides
date: 2016-06-01
venue: 'Optimizing the computational performance and maintainability of time-domain modellingtextendash-leveraging multiple right-hand-sides'
paperurl: 'https://slim.gatech.edu/Publications/Public/TechReport/2016/louboutin2016SEGocp/louboutin2016SEGocp.html'
citation: ' Mathias Louboutin,  Gerard Gorman,  Felix Herrmann, &quot;Optimizing the computational performance and maintainability of time-domain modellingtextendash-leveraging multiple right-hand-sides.&quot; Optimizing the computational performance and maintainability of time-domain modellingtextendash-leveraging multiple right-hand-sides, 2016.'
---
[Access paper here](https://slim.gatech.edu/Publications/Public/TechReport/2016/louboutin2016SEGocp/louboutin2016SEGocp.html){:target="_blank"}

Numerical solvers for the wave equation are a key component of Full-Waveform Inversion (FWI) and Reverse-Time Migration (RTM). The main computational cost of a wave-equation solver stems from the computation of the Laplacian at each time step. When using a finite difference discretization this can be characterized as a structured grid computation within Colella{\textquoteright}s Seven Dwarfs. Independent of the degree of parallelization the performance will be limited by the relatively low operational intensity (number of operations divided by memory traffic) of finite-difference stencils, that is so say that the method is memory bandwidth bound. For this reason many developers have focused on porting their code to platforms that have higher memory bandwidth, such as GPU{\textquoteright}s, or put significant effort into highly intrusive optimisations. However, these optimisations rarely strike the right performance vs productivity balance as the software becomes less maintainable and extensible. By solving the wave equation for multiple sources/right-hand-sides (RHSs) at once, we overcome this problem arriving at a time-stepping solver with higher operational intensity. In essence, we arrive at this result by turning the usual matrix-vector products into a matrix-matrix products where the first matrix implements the discretized wave equation and each column of the second matrix contain separate wavefields for each given source. By making this relatively minor change to the solver we readily achieved a $\times2$ speedup. While we limit ourselves to acoustic modeling, our approach can easily be extended to the anisotropic or elastic cases.
